I am [Sangram]😊, a passionate DevOps engineer with a focus on cloud cost optimization and automation. In this project, I've implemented an event-driven serverless solution that leverages AWS Lambda and CloudWatch Events to automate the process of optimizing storage costs for Amazon S3 buckets.

# Automated S3 Cost Optimization with AWS Lambda and CloudWatch Events

## Overview

This project aims to automate the optimization of Amazon S3 bucket costs using AWS Lambda and CloudWatch Events. By leveraging serverless architecture, the solution identifies and migrates infrequently accessed objects to lower-cost storage classes, such as GLACIER, without sacrificing accessibility or performance. This README provides an overview of the project structure, setup instructions, and usage guidelines.

## Features

- **Cost Reduction:** Automatically identifies and migrates infrequently accessed objects to lower-cost storage classes, resulting in significant reductions in S3 storage costs.
- **Operational Efficiency:** Minimizes manual intervention by automating the cost optimization process, freeing up resources for higher-value tasks.
- **Scalability:** Seamlessly scales to accommodate increasing storage requirements while maintaining cost optimization capabilities.
- **Reliability:** Utilizes AWS Lambda and CloudWatch Events for reliable and available cost optimization processes, with built-in monitoring and error handling mechanisms.

## Setup

### AWS Account Configuration

Ensure you have an AWS account with appropriate permissions to create and manage Lambda functions, CloudWatch Events, and S3 buckets.

### IAM Policy for Lambda Function

Create an IAM role with the following policy to allow the Lambda function to interact with S3:

```json
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "s3:ListBucket",
        "s3:GetObject",
        "s3:PutObject",
        "s3:CopyObject"
      ],
      "Resource": [
        "arn:aws:s3:::lambdausecase",
        "arn:aws:s3:::lambdausecase/*"
      ]
    }
  ]
}

```

## Deployment
The CLI solution for the creating all the require resources and adding the configuration policies.
The steps given below can be done in user interface of the aws also.



### CloudWatch Events Setup

Configure CloudWatch Events to trigger the Lambda function on a scheduled basis to perform cost optimization tasks.

1. Create a CloudWatch Events Rule:
We can create the multiple CloudWatch Events Rule for the invoking the lambda function multiple time depending upon the requirement of the project
    ```sh
    aws events put-rule --schedule-expression "rate(5 minutes)" --name S3CostOptimizerRule 
    ```

3. Add the Lambda Function as a target:
    ```sh
    aws events put-targets --rule S3CostOptimizerRule --targets "Id"="1","Arn"="arn:aws:lambda:your-region:your-account-id:function:s3BucketManagemant"
    ```

4. Grant permission to CloudWatch Events to invoke the Lambda function:
    ```sh
    aws lambda add-permission --function-name s3BucketManagemant --statement-id "AllowExecutionFromCloudWatch" \
      --action "lambda:InvokeFunction" --principal events.amazonaws.com --source-arn arn:aws:events:your-region:your-account-id:rule/S3CostOptimizerRule
    ```

## Usage

### Monitoring

Monitor the execution of the Lambda function and CloudWatch Events to ensure the scheduled cost optimization tasks are running as expected. You can use AWS CloudWatch Logs to view the logs generated by your Lambda function.



## Contribution

Contributions to this project are welcome! If you encounter any issues or have suggestions for improvements, please open an issue or submit a pull request on the GitHub repository.

---

By following the steps outlined above, you can effectively deploy and manage an AWS Lambda function to optimize S3 storage costs, ensuring cost-efficiency and streamlined storage management.



## Do checkout my Medium profile where i write on the Cloud Cost Optimization and DevOps Practices

🌱 **Explore My Latest Medium Articles**: [Medium Blog](https://medium.com/@sangramsankpal7812)

---

## Connect with Me on LinkedIn

Let's connect on LinkedIn for professional networking and to stay updated on industry insights. I'm eager to engage with like-minded professionals and collaborate on building smarter, more efficient cloud solutions together.

🔗 **Visit My LinkedIn Profile**: [ LinkedIn Profile](www.linkedin.com/in/sangram-sankpal-498720243)

---

## Feedback and Collaboration

Your feedback and collaboration are invaluable to me as I continue to grow and learn in the field of cloud technology and DevOps. I welcome any suggestions, contributions, or opportunities for collaboration.



---
